(DOCSP-23501): Add a new Swift Concurrency page to Swift SDK docs (#2284)
mongodb/docs-realm: source/sdk/swift/swift-concurrency.txt

in the background. The write block itself runs on the calling thread.
This provides thread-safety without requiring you to manually handle 
frozen objects or passing references across threads. 

However, while the write block itself is executed, this does block new 
transactions on the calling thread. This means that a large write using
the ``writeAsync`` API could block small, quick writes while it executes.

For more information, including a code example, refer to: :ref:`ios-async-write`.

Tasks and TaskGroups
--------------------

Swift concurrency provides APIs to manage :apple:`Tasks <documentation/swift/task>` 
and :apple:`TaskGroups <documentation/swift/taskgroup>`. The `Swift concurrency
documentation <https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/Concurrency.html>`__ 
defines a task as a unit of work that can be run asynchronously as part of 
your program. Task allows you to specificially define a unit of asynchronous 
work. TaskGroup lets you define a collection of Tasks to execute as a unit 
under the parent TaskGroup. 

Tasks and TaskGroups provide the ability to yield the thread to other 
important work or to cancel a long-running task that could be blocking 

> other operations. To get these benefits, you may be tempted to use Tasks

Reviewer: I guess my point was just that "may" grants permission while "might" suggests the possibility...
```suggestion
other operations. To get these benefits, you might be tempted to use Tasks
```

.. _swift-concurrency:

=============================
Swift Concurrency - Swift SDK
=============================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

> Swift Concurrency Fundamentals

Reviewer: The two headings after another looks a bit jumbled on the page. Can we dive right into the first paragraph here?

------------------------------

Swift's concurrency system provides built-in support for writing asynchronous 
and parallel code in a structured way. For a detailed overview of the 
Swift concurrency system, refer to the `Swift Programming Language Concurrency
topic <https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/Concurrency.html>`__.

Developers who want to implement Realm in an app that uses Swift concurrency

> features may have questions around how to use Realm with:

Reviewer: To say you might have questions without stating that this page has the answers feels a bit detached?

Personally I would remove this as the "on this page" does a better job.

- Async/Await APIs
- Tasks and TaskGroups
- Actor isolation
- Errors related to concurrency code

Realm Concurrency Caveats
-------------------------

As you implement concurrency features in your app, consider this caveat 
about Realm's threading model and Swift concurrency threading behaviors.

.. _swift-suspend-execution-with-await:

Suspending Execution with Await
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Anywhere you use the Swift keyword ``await`` marks a possible suspension 
point in the execution of your code. With Swift 5.7, once your code suspends, 

> subsequent code may not execute on the same thread. This means that 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subsequent code might not execute on the same thread. This means that 
```

**thread-confined**: that is, they are only valid on the thread on which 
they were created. Practically speaking, this means you cannot pass live 
instances to other threads. However, Realm Database offers several 
mechanisms for :ref:`sharing objects across threads 
<ios-communication-across-threads>`. These mechanisms typically require 
your code to do some explicit handling to safely pass data across threads.

You can use some of these mechanisms, such as :ref:`frozen objects 
<ios-frozen-objects>` or the :ref:`@ThreadSafe property wrapper 
<ios-thread-safe-reference>`, to safely use Realm objects and instances 
across threads with the ``await`` keyword. You can also avoid 
threading-related issues by marking any asynchronous Realm code with 
``@MainActor`` to ensure your apps always execute this code on the main 
thread.

As a general rule, keep in mind that using Realm in an ``await`` context 
*without* incorporating threading protection may yield inconsistent behavior. 
Sometimes, the code may succeed. In other cases, it may throw an error 
related to writing on an incorrect thread.

Async/Await APIs
----------------

> With the caveat of ensuring that you execute asynchronous code on the same 

Reviewer: Maybe?
```suggestion
Assuming you know to execute asynchronous code on the same 
```

Author: Hmm, I think I'll just delete this line entirely because I think this is pretty well covered throughout the page, and in the paragraphs following this list of examples.

examples, check out:

- :ref:`Async/Await Login <ios-async-await-login>`
- :ref:`Manage Email/Password Users <ios-manage-email-password-users>`
- :ref:`Link User Identities - Async/Await <ios-link-user-identities>`
- :ref:`Open a Synced Realm <ios-flexible-sync-open-realm>`
- :ref:`Manage Flexible Sync Subscriptions <ios-flexible-sync>`
- :ref:`Async/Await Call a Serverless Function <ios-async-await-call-function>`
- :ref:`Async/Await Query MongoDB <ios-mongodb-async-await-query>`

Realm does not provide Swift async/await support for reading or writing objects.
However, the Realm Swift SDK does provide an API to safely perform background 
writes without requiring you to use threading protection. For more information, 
refer to **Perform Background Writes** below.

If you have specific feature requests related to Swift async/await APIs,
check out the `MongoDB Feedback Engine for Realm 
<https://feedback.mongodb.com/forums/923521-realm>`_. The Realm Swift SDK
team plans to continue to develop concurrency-related features based on 
community feedback and Swift concurrency evolution.

Perform Background Writes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A commonly requested use case for asynchronous code is to perform write 

Reviewer: Non-standard adjective phrase before noun gets hyphen?
```suggestion
A commonly-requested use case for asynchronous code is to perform write 
```

operations in the background without blocking the main thread. While the 
Realm Swift SDK does not currently support an async/await API for this, it 
does have an API specifically for performing background writes: ``writeAsync``.

This API allows you to add, update, or delete objects in the background 
without using frozen objects or passing a thread-safe reference. With this 
API, waiting to obtain the write lock and committing a transaction occur

> in the background. The write block itself is executed on the calling thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the background. The write block itself runs on the calling thread.
```

This provides thread-safety without requiring you to manually handle 
frozen objects or passing references across threads. 

However, while the write block itself is executed, this does block new 
transactions on the calling thread. This means that a large write using
the ``writeAsync`` API could block small, quick writes while it executes.

> For more information, including a code example, refer to: :ref:`Perform a 

Reviewer: If you just use `ios-async-write` in the ref, instead of giving a title, it will pull the title from the header. This can help maintainability if the target header changes later.

Background Write <ios-async-write>`.

Tasks and TaskGroups
--------------------

Swift concurrency provides APIs to manage :apple:`Tasks <documentation/swift/task>` 
and :apple:`TaskGroups <documentation/swift/taskgroup>`. The `Swift concurrency
documentation <https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide/Concurrency.html>`__ 
defines a task as a unit of work that can be run asynchronously as part of 
your program. Task allows you to specificially define a unit of asynchronous 
work. TaskGroup lets you define a collection of Tasks to execute as a unit 
under the parent TaskGroup. 

Tasks and TaskGroups provide the ability to yield the thread to other 

> important work, or to cancel a long-running task that could be blocking 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
important work or to cancel a long-running task that could be blocking 
```

> other operations. Because of this, Swift developers may desire to use Tasks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
other operations. Because of this, you might want to use Tasks
```

Author: I was trying to avoid "you might want" because that implies a recommendation - i.e. you might want to do a thing this way. But really, this is about Swift developers making the assumption that it's safe to do this. But yeah, I struggled with this wording when writing the page, and you calling it out here makes me think I should update it.

and TaskGroups to manage realm writes in the background.

However, the thread-confined constraints described in :ref:`Suspending 
Execution with Await <swift-suspend-execution-with-await>` above apply in
the Task context. If your Task contains ``await`` points, subsequent code 

> may run or resume on a different thread and violate Realm's thread confinement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
might run or resume on a different thread and violate Realm's thread confinement.
```

to ensure code that accesses Realm only runs on the main thread. This negates 
some of the benefits of using Tasks, and may mean this is not a good design 
choice for apps that use Realm unless you are using Tasks solely for 
networking activities like managing users.

Actor Isolation
---------------

Actor isolation provides the perception of confining Realm access to a 
dedicated actor, and therefore seems like a safe way to manage Realm 
access in an asynchronous context.

However, using Realm in a non-``@MainActor`` async function is currently 
not supported. 

In Swift 5.6, this would often work by coincidence. Execution after an 
``await`` would continue on whatever thread the awaited thing ran on. 
Using ``await Realm()`` in an async function would result in the code 
following that running on the main thread until your next call to an 
actor-isolated function. 

Swift 5.7 instead hops threads whenever changing actor isolation contexts. 
An unisolated async function always runs on a background thread instead.

If you have code which uses ``await Realm()`` and works in 5.6, marking 
the function as ``@MainActor`` will make it work with Swift 5.7. It will 

> function very similarly to what it happened to be doing in 5.6.

Reviewer: Maybe? Just attempting to tighten up the text
```suggestion
function how it did (unintentionally) in 5.6.
```

To avoid threading-related issues in code that uses Swift concurrency features:

- Do not change execution contexts when accessing realm. If you open a realm 
  on the main thread to provide data for your UI, annotate subsequent functions
  where you access the realm asynchronously with ``@MainActor`` to ensure it
  always runs on the main thread. Remember that ``await`` marks a suspension 
  point that could change to a different thread.
- Use the ``writeAsync`` API to :ref:`perform a background write 
  <ios-async-write>`. This manages realm access in a thread-safe way without 
  requiring you to write specialized code to do it yourself. This is a special
  API that outsources aspects of the write process - where it is safe to do 
  so - to run in an async context. You do not use this method with Swift's 
  ``async/await`` syntax - use this method synchronously in your code.
- If you want to explicitly write concurrency code where accessing a realm 
  is done in a thread-safe way, you can explicitly :ref:`pass instances across 
  threads <ios-thread-safe-reference>` or use :ref:`frozen objects 
  <ios-frozen-objects>` where applicable to avoid threading-related crashes.

>   This does require a good understanding of realm's threading model, as well

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This does require a good understanding of Realm's threading model, as well
```
